Add Macros by Example chapter. (#195)
amzn/ion-docs: src/macros-by-example.adoc

single string:

----
(:make_string)                 ⇒ ""
(:make_string "a")             ⇒ "a"
(:make_string "a" "b"    )     ⇒ "ab"
(:make_string "a" "b" "c")     ⇒ "abc"
(:make_string "a" "b" "c" "d") ⇒ "abcd"
----

To make this work, the definition of make_string is effectively:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* make_string [(*text \...* parts)] …)
----

This says that `parts` is a _rest parameter_ accepting zero or more arguments of type `*text*`.
The `*\...*` modifier can only occur on the last parameter, declaring that “all the rest” of the
arguments will be passed to that one name.

NOTE: The Ion grammar treats identifiers like `text` and operators like `\...` as separate tokens
regardless of whether they are separated by whitespace. 

At this point our distinction between parameters and arguments becomes apparent, since
they are no longer one-to-one: this macro with one parameter can be invoked with one argument, or
twenty, or none. We describe the acceptable number of arguments for a parameter as its
_cardinality_.  In the examples so far, all parameters have had _exactly-one_ cardinality, while
`parts` has _zero-or-more_ cardinality.  We’ll see additional cardinalities soon!

> === Templates Transform Streams

Reviewer: This title is a bit odd--I think we're saying that "Macros Transform Streams", but even the sentence as a section title is a bit odd to me.  Maybe "Stream of Values" or something more noun-like for the section title?

Author: Most-recent commit uses "Arguments and Results are Streams"

Rest-parameters raise a question: what happens when a template references a parameter that was
given more than one argument?  The answer revolves around a unique aspect of Ion’s macro system
and template language: the inputs to and the output from a macro are streams of values,
constrained in size by cardinality declarations.  When a macro is invoked, each parameter is
bound to a stream of values, and within the macro definition, each parameter’s name is a reference to that stream,
not to a specific value.  The declared cardinality of a parameter constrains the number of
elements produced by its stream, and is verified by the macro expansion system.

More generally, the template language itself is stream-oriented, and the results of template
expressions are streams.  While most expression forms produce exactly-one value, various macros

> and special forms can produce zero or more values.

Reviewer: Macros and their associated expressions all operate on streams I _think_ is the generalization.  Is the "more generally" referring to the expressions in the macros, e-expressions, or both?

Author: I reworked this whole section, give the latest commit a look.

We have everything we need to illustrate, via another system macro, `values`:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* values [(*any\...* vals)] vals)
----
----
(:values 1)           ⇒ 1
(:values 1 true null) ⇒ 1 true null
(:values)             ⇒ _nothing_
----

> Here we finally see a macro that produces something other than exactly one value!  The `values`

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.  The sentence is redundant to the following sentence.

```suggestion
The `values`
```

macro accepts any number of arguments and returns their values, effectively a multi-value
identity function.  We can use this to explore how streams combine in E-expressions.

==== Inlining in encoded data

When an E-expression occurs at top-level or within a list or S-expression, the results are

> inlined into the surrounding container:

Reviewer: FWIW, I've been using the term splice here--I am not sure that is better, but inlined doesn't quite work for me.

Author: I like splice, will use.

----
[first, (:values), last]          ⇒ [first, last]
[first, (:values "middle"), last] ⇒ [first, "middle", last]
(first (:values left right) last) ⇒ (first left right last)
----

> This also applies in many (but not all!) argument positions inside an E-expression:

Reviewer: What is the case where this is not true?

Author: You can't use an E-expression where a surrounding E-expression is expecting a delimiting container or macro-shaped argument.

Reviewer: I see--I mean that is just the syntax rules of e-expression, I find this sentence to be confusing in that light, but it is probably fine.

Author: Rewrite to: "wherever a tagged type can appear"

----
(first (:values (:values left right) (:values)) last) => (first left right last)
----

Note that each argument-expression always maps to one parameter, even when that expression
returns too-few or too-many values.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* reverse [a, b] [b, a])
----

[{mrk}]
----
(:reverse (:values 5 USD))   ⇒ _**error**: 'reverse' expects 2 arguments, given 1_
(:reverse 5 (:values) USD)   ⇒ _**error**: 'reverse' expects 2 arguments, given 3_
(:reverse (:values 5 6) USD) ⇒ _**error**: argument 'a' expects 1 value, given 2_
----

In this example, the parameters expect exactly one argument, producing exactly one value.  When

> the cardinality allows multiple values, then arguments are inlined into a single stream.  We saw

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion. I think the term _flattened_ is more precise.

```suggestion
the cardinality allows multiple values, then arguments are flattened into a single stream.  We saw
```

Author: Newly wrote:

> When the cardinality allows multiple values, then the argument result-streams are concatenated.

this (rather subtly) above in the nested use of `values`, but can also illustrate using the
rest-parameter to `make_string`, using indentation to clarify the nesting:

----
(:make_string (:values)
              a
              (:values b
                       (:values c)
                       d)
              e)                   ⇒ "abcde"

> ----

Reviewer: I am struggling to follow what we're trying to say in this example and I think it is because we can't see all the streams because the syntax is hiding them.  Maybe we need a notation for streams e.g., `a => <a>` and `(:values b c) => <b c>` or something?

Reviewer 2: PartiQL "Chevron" maybe? `<< foo bar { } >>`

Author: Is this better?
```
(:make_string (:values) a (:values b (:values c) d) e) ⇒
(:make_string a (:values b (:values c) d) e) ⇒
(:make_string a (:values b c d) e) ⇒
(:make_string a b c d e) ⇒
"abcde"
```

Reviewer 3: > PartiQL "Chevron" maybe? << foo bar { } >>

I know we aren't dependent on PartiQL syntax, but PartiQL uses `<< >>` for their bag type, so I'd rather find something else.

> Is this better?

Yes, I think the step-by-step macro expansion helps, though I'd format it a little differently to make it clear that each line is a continued process from the previous line.

```
(:make_string (:values) a (:values b (:values c) d) e)
    ⇒ (:make_string a (:values b (:values c) d) e)
    ⇒ (:make_string a (:values b c d) e)
    ⇒ (:make_string a b c d e)
    ⇒ "abcde"
```

----
{ name: (:values) }     ⇒ { }
{ name: (:values v) }   ⇒ { name: v }
{ name: (:values v w) } ⇒ { name: v, name: w }
----

An E-expression can even be used in place of a key-value pair, in which case it must return
structs, which are merged into the surrounding container:

[{mrk}]
----
{ a:1, (:values), z:3 }             ⇒ { a:1, z:3 }
{ a:1, (:values {}), z:3 }          ⇒ { a:1, z:3 }
{ a:1, (:values {b:2}), z:3 }       ⇒ { a:1, b:2, z:3 }
{ a:1, (:values {b:2} {z:3}), z:3 } ⇒ { a:1, b:2, z:3, z:3 }

{ a:1, (:values key "value") } ⇒ _**error**: struct expected for inlining into struct_
----

==== Inlining in template expressions

The preceding examples demonstrate inlining of E-expressions into encoded data, but similar
stream-inlining occurs within the template language, making it trivial to convert a stream to a
list:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* int_list
  [(**int\...** vals)]
  [ vals ])
(*public* clumsy_bag
  [(**any\...** elts)]
  { '': elts })
----
----
(:int_list)   ⇒ []
(:clumsy_bag) ⇒ {}

(:int_list 1 2 3)    ⇒ [1, 2, 3]
(:clumsy_bag true 2) ⇒ {'':true, '':2}
----

As a reminder, streams and lists are different, there’s no flattening involved, and declared

> types are verified:

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
Streams and lists are different, there’s no flattening involved, and declared
types are verified:
```

[{mrk}]
----
(:int_list 1 [2] 3) ⇒ _**error**: [2] is not an int_
----

TODO: demonstrate inlining in TDL macro invocations

=== Mapping Templates Over Streams

Another way to produce a stream is via a mapping form. The `*for_each*` special form evaluates a
template once for each value provided by a macro parameter.  Each time, the parameter name is
shadowed and rebound to the next value on the stream.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* prices
  [(*symbol* currency), (*number\...* amount)]
  (*for_each* amount
    (price amount currency)))
----
----
(:prices GBP 10 9.99 12.)
⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP} {amount:12., currency:GBP}
----

TODO: Consider the more-general binding form

=== Empty Streams: `*void*`

To wrap up our discussion of streams, we have another important built-in macro: `void` accepts

> no values and produces no value. In other words, it’s a constant, the empty stream:

Reviewer: Though technically isn't it a special case of `(:values)`?

----
(:int_list (:void)) ⇒ []
(:int_list 1 (:void) 2) ⇒ [1, 2]
[(:void)]   ⇒ []
{a:(:void)} ⇒ {}
----

When used as a macro argument, a `void` invocation (like any other expression) counts as one
argument, albeit one with no value(s).

[{mrk}]
----
(:pi (:void)) ⇒ _**error**: 'pi' expects 0 arguments, given 1_
----

Void is important because we need something outside the Ion data model to express that Ion data
doesn't exist.  We can’t use null because `null` is a value!  In much the same way that Ion
differentiates a null-field from an absent field (_e.g._, `{a:null}` versus `{}`), macros need to
differentiate the absence of value from all other values in the Ion data model.

We’ll use the term _void_ most accurately as a synonym for “empty stream”, but you might catch us
talking as if void were a value, when it’s actually no value at all.  We’ll even mint the word
_voidable_ to describe parameters that can accept zero values, like the ``*\...*``s above. This

> neologism will prove useful, you’ll see.

Reviewer: Ah okay--I do feel like this buries the lede.  The empty stream is the critical concept--void is just a spelling for it.

> neologism will prove useful, you’ll see.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

> but you might catch us talking as if void were a value, when it’s actually no value at all

We should just be crisp about values versus streams and not dance around "no value."  Thinking about streams as a first class concept avoids a lot of this rhetorical flourish.

```suggestion
We’ll use the term _void_ to mean “empty stream.”
We’ll even mint the word
_voidable_ to describe parameters that can accept streams of zero values, like the ``*\...*``s above.
```

Author: I reworked this section.

The special-case E-expression `(:)` is synonymous with `(:void)`
and exists solely as a more succinct argument expression for voidable parameters.

=== Other Cardinalities

For a language that’s thoroughly stream-oriented, rest-parameters don’t offer much flexibility
with respect to cardinality.  The `*\...*` modifier can only be the final parameter, meaning that
only that parameter can be invoked with more than one subexpression and produce more than one
value.  So far other parameters must have exactly-one value, which is fairly limiting.

In fact, the macro system provides four distinct cardinality constraints: exactly-one,
zero-or-one, zero-or-more, and one-or-more.  They each have modifier symbols that can be used in
signatures, namely `*!*`, `*?*`, `***`, and `*+*`. The former is the default, so the signatures

> `[arg]`, `[(*any* arg)]`, and `[(*any!* arg)]` are all equivalent.

Reviewer: I would edit this down to get rid of the text around limitation of the rest-parameters for doing cardinality, I don't think it adds much.

```suggestion
As described earlier, parameters can have different cardinality of arguments, meaning that a parameter may be assigned with multiple argument sub-expressions.  Until now, we've only seen a single argument per parameter with the exception of rest-parameters.

The macro system provides four distinct cardinality constraints: _exactly-one_,
_zero-or-one_, _zero-or-more_, and _one-or-more_.  They each have modifier symbols that can be used in
signatures, namely `*!*`, `*?*`, `***`, and `*+*`. `*!*` is the default, so the signatures
`[arg]`, `[(*any* arg)]`, and `[(*any!* arg)]` are all equivalent.
```

> ==== zero-or-one

Reviewer: It has been mentioned before--but let's stick to title case even for these kind of section headings.

The zero-or-one cardinality, denoted in signatures by the modifier `*?*`, is much like the default
exactly-one cardinality, except the parameter is voidable.  That is, it accepts an empty-stream

> argument as a way to denote an absent parameter.

Reviewer: This makes me think it is worth noting that a single value is really a stream containing a single value, I've called this a _singleton stream_ or just _singleton_ colloquially.

Author: Good suggestion, I added a small "exactly-one" section prior to this one.

more useful to fill in a default value, and to do that we introduce another special form that can
detect void:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* temperature
  [(*decimal* degrees), (*symbol?* scale)]
  {degrees: degrees, scale: (*if_void* scale (*literal* K) scale)})
----
----
(:temperature 96 F)    ⇒ {degrees:96,  scale:F}
(:temperature 283 (:)) ⇒ {degrees:283, scale:K}
----

The `*if_void*` form is if/then/else syntax testing stream emptiness. It has three sub-expressions,
the first being a stream to check. If and only if that stream is void (_i.e._, it produces no
values), the second sub-expression is expanded and its results are returned by the `*if_void*`
expression. Otherwise, it produces at least one value, so the third sub-expression is expanded and
returned.

NOTE: Exactly one branch is expanded, because otherwise the void stream might be used in a context
that requires a value, resulting in an errant expansion error.

To refine things a bit further, trailing voidable arguments can be omitted entirely:

----
(:temperature 283) ⇒ {degrees:283, scale:K}
----

==== zero-or-more

A zero-or-more `***` parameter is identical in meaning to our friend `*\...*` from the perspective

> of its template, but it can be used in any position, not just last place.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

Also, does the syntax for invoking differ between these two cardinalities?

```suggestion
A zero-or-more `***` parameter is identical in meaning to `*\...*` from the perspective
of its template, but it can be used in any position, not just last place.
```

Author: > Also, does the syntax for invoking differ between these two cardinalities?

Yeah, that's what the majority of this section discusses.  I think I'm missing your point...

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* prices
  [(*number** amount), (*symbol* currency)]
  (*for_each* amount
    (price amount currency)))
----

From the perspective of the invoker, the calling convention is different since the “all the rest”
convention can’t be used to draw the boundaries of the stream.  Instead, we use a list or

> S-expression as a delimiting container to group the applicable sub-expressions:

Reviewer: I wonder if it is worth saying that this is "delimiting syntax" because the container doesn't exist in the data model per se.

[{mrk}]
----
(:prices () JPY)         ⇒ _void_
(:prices (10  9.99) GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP}
(:prices [10, 9.99] GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP}
----

The delimiting sequence is effectively shorthand for a `values` expression, but arbitrary
expressions are not allowed:

[{mrk}]
----
(:prices (:values 10 9.99 12.) GBP) ⇒ _**error**: delimiting list or sexp expected_
(:prices (:) GBP)                   ⇒ _**error**: delimiting list or sexp expected_
----

That’s because the binary representation of these parameters uses a tagless format for these
delimiters to keep the common case as dense as possible, and it’s not possible to replace that
container with a macro invocation.  The text form mirrors that limitation, but you can always

> call a macro inside the delimiter, with no loss of generality:

Reviewer: It is unclear to me why the text syntax needs to have this limitation--it seems arbitrary to me.

Author: I'm trying to prevent legal expressions in text that don't have corresponding binary expressions (and vice versa).  The binary form always has the delimiting syntax.

That said, I do want to reconsider these things after I have a better grip on the binary encoding.

----
(:prices [(:values 10)] GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP}
----

> Note that the delimiter is required even for single values to avoid ambiguity.  Consider this macro:

Reviewer: BTW, I think this is the crux of the syntactic requirement--I think we should lead with that.

Author: I rearranged several parts of this section, I think it makes more sense.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* ouch [(*list** stuff)] …)
----

In the E-expression `(:ouch [])`  is that list the delimiting container, or the sole input value?
When expanding the E-expression does `stuff` produce void, or a single empty list?  `***`-arguments
require a delimiting container precisely so there’s no ambiguity, regardless of the element type,

> and the answer is that `stuff` is void.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
In the E-expression `(:ouch [])`  without this rule, it would be ambiguous if the arguments were empty or a single list value.
With this rule, this invocation always means the empty arguments which flattens to the empty stream.
```

----

Now `c` receives the symbol `for_c` while the other parameters are all void.  If we want to provide
just `e`, then we must also provide a delimiter for `d`:

----
(:optionals [] (:) for_c () for_e) ⇒ [for_c, for_e]
----

=== Tagless and Fixed-Width Types

In Ion 1.0, the binary encoding of every value starts off with a
“type tag”, an opcode that indicates the data-type of the next value and thus the interpretation
of the following octets of data.  In general, these tags also indicate whether the value has
annotations, and whether it’s null.

These tags are necessary because the Ion data model allows values of any type to be used
anywhere. Ion documents are not schema-constrained: nothing forces any part of the data to have a
specific type or shape.  We call Ion “self-describing” precisely because each value
self-describes its type via a type tag.

If schema constraints are enforced through some mechanism outside the serializer/deserializer, the type tags are unnecessary and may add up to a non-trivial amount of wasted space.
when you observe that the overhead for each value also includes length information: encoding an
octet of data takes two octets on the stream.

> Ion 1.1 tries to mitigate this overhead in the binary format by allowing macro parameters to have tagless types.  These are semantic subtypes of the concrete types,

Reviewer: "semantic subtypes" is an odd term, why not say "subtypes?"

no values and produces no value. In other words, it’s a constant, the empty stream:

----
(:int_list (:void)) ⇒ []
(:int_list 1 (:void) 2) ⇒ [1, 2]
[(:void)]   ⇒ []
{a:(:void)} ⇒ {}
----

When used as a macro argument, a `void` invocation (like any other expression) counts as one
argument, albeit one with no value(s).

[{mrk}]
----
(:pi (:void)) ⇒ _**error**: 'pi' expects 0 arguments, given 1_
----

Void is important because we need something outside the Ion data model to express that Ion data
doesn't exist.  We can’t use null because `null` is a value!  In much the same way that Ion
differentiates a null-field from an absent field (for example, `{a:null}` versus `{}`), macros
need to differentiate the absence of value from all other values in the Ion data model.

We’ll use the term _void_ most accurately as a synonym for “empty stream”, but you might catch us
talking as if void were a value, when it’s actually no value at all.  We’ll even mint the word
_voidable_ to describe parameters that can accept zero values, like the ``*\...*``s above. This
neologism will prove useful, you’ll see.

> The special-case E-expression `(:)` is synonymous with `(:void)`

Reviewer 3: Do you think it's necessary to have three synonyms—`(:values)`, `(:void)`, and `(:)`?

Author: They aren't really synonymous, since `void` accepts no arguments.   At one point we got rid of `void` but we brought it back once we realized how useful it was to have the dedicated term, and to have the code match that term.

Also note that `values` is over-represented in the document, I don't think it'll get used in practice anywhere near as commonly as its used herein.  You rarely need to pass more-than-one value in a context where a single argument is required.  So mostly its needed to collate a result stream.

This does make me think that perhaps this doc shouldn't make so much use of `values`...

is occurring within an Ion 1.1 document;
second, we’ll use the relation notation, `⇒`, to mean “expands to”.  So we can say:

----
(:pi) ⇒ 3.141592653589793
----

=== Simple Templates

Most macros are of course non-constant.  Since macros are mathematically functional, this implies
that they can accept inputs that determine their results.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* price
  [a, c]                          // signature
  { amount: a, currency: c })     // template
----
----
(:price 99 USD) ⇒ { amount: 99, currency: USD }
----

This macro has a signature that declares two parameters, named `a` and `c`, and it
therefore accepts two arguments when invoked.

NOTE: We are careful to distinguish between the
views from “inside” and “outside” the macro: _parameters_ are the names used by a macro’s
implementation to refer to its expansion-time inputs, while _arguments_ are the data provided to a
macro at the point of invocation. In other words, we have “formal” parameters and “actual”
arguments.

The struct
in this macro is our first non-trivial _template_, an expression in Ion’s new domain-specific language

> for defining macro functions.  This expression language treats Ion scalar values (except for

Reviewer 3: Somehow I missed this sentence on my first read-through, and I was confused about how macros and templates were related. 🤷‍♂️ 

Introducing/defining the term "template" is really important, and might be worth trying to shoehorn some mention of this into the very first example. (Maybe: "The value `3.14159...` is a trivial example of a _template_, an expression in Ion 1.1's domain-specific language for defining macro functions.")

(*public* reverse [a, b] [b, a])
----
----
(:reverse first {amount:a, currency:c}) ⇒ [{amount:a, currency:c}, first]
----

Note that the `a` in the E-expression is _not_ part of the
expression language and not a reference to the macro’s first parameter or any other named entity.
From the point of view of ``reverse``’s template, the input struct is literal data.

E-expressions can nest, so we could also encode the same data using `price`:

----
(:reverse first (:price a c)) ⇒ [{amount:a, currency:c}, first]
----

=== Invoking Macros from Templates

So the template language treats symbols as parameter references, other scalars as literals, and
structs and lists as quasi-literals, but what about S-expressions?

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* website_url
  [path]
  (make_string "https://www.amazon.com/" path))
----

Template expressions that are S-expressions are operator invocations, where the operators are
either special forms or macro invocations.  In this case, it’s the latter: an invocation of the
system macro (_i.e._, built-in function) `make_string`, which concatenates its arguments to produce
a single string:

----
(:website_url "gp/cart") ⇒ "https://www.amazon.com/gp/cart"
----

> In the template language, macro invocations can appear almost anywhere:

Reviewer 2: What are the rules for macro resolution in the templates? Can I refer to a macro from another module? How so?

Author: Good question, it'll be in a forthcoming doc covering the module system.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* detail_page_url
  [asin]
  (website_url (make_string "dp/" asin)))
----
----
(:detail_page_url "B08KTZ8249") ⇒ "https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08KTZ8249"
----

NOTE: While this doesn’t look like much of an improvement, the full string takes 38 bytes to encode,
but the macro invocation takes as few as 12 bytes.

=== Special Form: `*literal*`

When a template-expression is syntactically an S-expression, its first
element must be a symbol that matches either a set of keywords denoting the special forms, or the
name of a previously-defined macro.  The interpretation of the S-expression’s remaining elements
depends on how the symbol resolves.  In the case of macro invocations, we’ve seen above that the
following elements are (so far!) arbitrary template expressions, but for special forms that’s not
always the case. The `*literal*` form makes this clear:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* USD_price [dollars] (price dollars (*literal* USD)))
----
----
(:USD_price 12.99) ⇒ { amount: 12.99, currency: USD }
----

> In this template, we can’t just write `(price dollars USD)` because the symbol `USD` would be

Reviewer 2: Is the symbol `'USD'` a reference to the variable or just a text symbol? Related, are there constraints on what constitutes valid identifiers? Is it simply the symbol identifier character class?

Author: In the template language, all symbols are macro- or variable-references unless they are escaped by `literal`.

Yes, "identifier" means the symbol identifier class.  That's what enables unambiguous use of the "operator class" symbols like `...` and the cardinality modifiers.

treated as an unbound variable reference and a syntax error, so we turn it into literal data by

> “escaping” it with `*literal*`.

Reviewer 2: Can we turn expansion back on with `(unquote ..` I mean `(unliteral ..`? 😜

Author: No, this isn't `quasiquote`.  I wasn't planning to add that since I think the existing forms are sufficient for most use cases. The quasiliteral list/strict behavior helps quite a bit.  Also `quasiquote/unquote` is subtle and tricky to get right.

(:reverse 5 (:values) USD)   ⇒ _**error**: 'reverse' expects 2 arguments, given 3_
(:reverse (:values 5 6) USD) ⇒ _**error**: argument 'a' expects 1 value, given 2_
----

In this example, the parameters expect exactly one argument, producing exactly one value.  When
the cardinality allows multiple values, then arguments are inlined into a single stream.  We saw
this (rather subtly) above in the nested use of `values`, but can also illustrate using the
rest-parameter to `make_string`, using indentation to clarify the nesting:

----
(:make_string (:values)
              a
              (:values b
                       (:values c)
                       d)
              e)                   ⇒ "abcde"
----

Inlining within sequences is straightforward, but structs are trickier due to their key/value
nature.  When used in field-value position, each result from a macro is bound to the field-name
independently, leading to the field being repeated or even absent:

----
{ name: (:values) }     ⇒ { }
{ name: (:values v) }   ⇒ { name: v }
{ name: (:values v w) } ⇒ { name: v, name: w }
----

An E-expression can even be used in place of a key-value pair, in which case it must return

> structs, which are merged into the surrounding container:

Reviewer 2: Are the annotations from the result structs also merged?

Author: Yes, I'll add an example.

argument as a way to denote an absent parameter.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* temperature
  [(*decimal* degrees), (*symbol?* scale)]
  {degrees: degrees, scale: scale})
----

Since the scale is voidable, we can pass it void:

----
(:temperature 96 F)    ⇒ {degrees:96, scale:F}
(:temperature 283 (:)) ⇒ {degrees:283}
----

Note that the result’s `scale` field has disappeared because no value was provided.  It would be
more useful to fill in a default value, and to do that we introduce another special form that can
detect void:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* temperature
  [(*decimal* degrees), (*symbol?* scale)]
  {degrees: degrees, scale: (*if_void* scale (*literal* K) scale)})
----
----
(:temperature 96 F)    ⇒ {degrees:96,  scale:F}
(:temperature 283 (:)) ⇒ {degrees:283, scale:K}
----

The `*if_void*` form is if/then/else syntax testing stream emptiness. It has three sub-expressions,
the first being a stream to check. If and only if that stream is void (_i.e._, it produces no
values), the second sub-expression is expanded and its results are returned by the `*if_void*`
expression. Otherwise, it produces at least one value, so the third sub-expression is expanded and
returned.

> 

Reviewer 3: Slightly related question—is it valid to do something like this? If I've got my syntax correct, then this should be a macro that requires one or both of `a` and `b`. Is `(void (void))` a reliable/recommended way to intentionally cause a macro invocation error? (Could I just use `(some_undefined_macro)` to get the same effect?)
```
(public a_or_b
    [(any? a), (any? b)]
    {
        a: (if_void 
                a
                (if_void 
                    b
                    (void (void))
                    (void))  // Could also be a since a == (void) anyway
                a),
        b: (if_void 
                b
                (if_void 
                    a
                    (void (void))
                    (void))  // Could also be b since b == (void) anyway
                b),
    })
```
```
(:a_or_b 123 456) ⇒ { a:123, b:456 }
(:a_or_b 123 (:)) ⇒ { a:123 }
(:a_or_b (:) 456) ⇒ { b:456 }
(:a_or_b (:) (:)) ⇒ ERROR
```

Author: If I get my way, `(void (void))` will cause a compile time error when that macro definition is encountered, since the code is malformed in a statically-detectable way.   I'll take this as a request for a first-class way for macros to signal an error during their expansion.

But yeah, the compiler in my head thinks your code would work as intended.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we need another special form. E.g.: `(err "At least one of 'a' and 'b' must be provided")`

----
(:prices () JPY) ⇒ _**error**: at least one value expected for + parameter_
(:prices [99] EUR)               ⇒ {amount:99, currency:EUR}
(:prices \((:) (:values 99)) EUR) ⇒ {amount:99, currency:EUR}
----

Note that among the delimited expressions, empty results are fine, as long as their concatenation
produces one or more values.

=== Optional Arguments

When a trailing parameter is voidable, an invocation can omit its corresponding argument, as long
as no following parameter is being given a value.  We’ve seen this as applied to rest-parameters,
but it also applies to `*?*` and `***` cardinality:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* optionals
  [(**any* **a), (*any?* b), (*any!* c), (*any** d), (*any?* e), (*any\...* f)]
  (make_list a b c d e f))
----

Since `d`, `e`, and `f` are all voidable, they can be omitted by invokers.  But `c` is required so
`a` and `b` must always be present, at least as an empty delimiter:

----
(:optionals [] (:) for_c) ⇒ [for_c]
----

Now `c` receives the symbol `for_c` while the other parameters are all void.  If we want to provide
just `e`, then we must also provide a delimiter for `d`:

----
(:optionals [] (:) for_c () for_e) ⇒ [for_c, for_e]
----

> === Tagless and Fixed-Width Types

Reviewer 2: Did we consider the encoder inferring that a type _may_ be tagless and just, well, not tagging it?

I suppose we'd need a way to restrict that the type was not just a non-null "concrete" type _and_ that it didnt' allow annotations... but I'd say if something can be made tagless we should just do that for folks. Adding a modifier for them to specify it just adds the complexity of them taking advantage of it when they can.

Author: IIUC the binary encoding has a way to "remove tags on the fly" when it makes sense to do so.  I'll let @zslayton explain, but I think the summary is that when there's more than one value provided to a tagged parameter, and all values can be encoded without tags, then a bit is set and the tags are omitted for that invocation.

The `tagless` types basically require the data to follow that constraint, so that additional overhead can be avoided.

Reviewer 2: In talking to Zack, the other restriction (that I think is called out in a different section) is that an argument passed as a tagless parameter cannot be a macro invocation.

[[sec:macroexample]]
== Macros by Example

> :mrk: subs="+normal"

Reviewer: I am guessing we'll eventually want this stuff in a prelude or something, what does `mrk` stand for?

Author: `mrk` is for "markup", trying to keep things short.  I welcome suggestions.  I avoided "normal" b/c I intended to try to scope it down more (I think I only need `quotes`).

Before getting into the technical details of Ion’s macro and module system, it’ll help to be more
familiar with the _use_ of macros.  We’ll step through increasingly sophisticated use cases, some
admittedly synthetic for illustrative purposes, with the intent of teaching the core concepts and
moving parts without getting into the weeds of more formal specification.

=== Constants

The most basic macro is a constant:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* pi []
  3.141592653589793)
----

> This declaration—taken recklessly out of context to keep things simple—defines a public macro

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
This declaration—taken out of context to keep things simple—defines a public macro
```

named `pi`.  The `[]` is the macro’s signature, in this case a trivial one that declares no

> parameters.  The macro therefore accepts no arguments and always returns the obvious value.

Reviewer: Where are we with respect to visibility modifiers?  Are they still a thing?

Author: It's still on my TODO list so I left the draft as-is.

> parameters.  The macro therefore accepts no arguments and always returns the obvious value.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
parameters.  The macro therefore accepts no arguments and always returns a constant value.
```

To use this macro in a document, we write an _encoding expression_, aka E-expression:

[{mrk}]
----
*$ion_1_1*
(:pi)
----

The syntax `(:pi)` looks a lot like an S-expression.  It’s not, though, since colons
cannot appear unquoted in that context.  Ion 1.1 makes use of what’s invalid syntax in Ion
1.0—specifically, the `(:` digraph—to denote E-expressions.  Those characters must be followed by
a reference to a macro, and we say that the E-expression is an invocation of the macro.  Here,
`(:pi)` is an invocation of the macro named `pi`.

> NOTE: We also call these “smile expressions” when we’re feeling particularly casual.

Reviewer 3: :smile:

That document is equivalent to the following, in the sense that they denote the same data:

[{mrk}]
----
*$ion_1_1*
3.141592653589793
----

The process by which the Ion implementation turns the former document into the latter is called
_macro expansion_ or just _expansion_.  This happens automatically and (largely) invisibly to

> Ion-consuming applications: the stream of values in both cases are the same.  The documents have

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
The process by which the Ion implementation turns the former document into the latter is called
_macro expansion_ or just _expansion_.  This happens transparently to
Ion-consuming applications: the stream of values in both cases are the same.  The documents have
```

the same content, encoded in two different ways.  It’s reasonable to think of `(:pi)` as a custom
encoding for `3.141592653589793`, and the notation’s similarity to S-expressions leads us to the
term “encoding expression”.

NOTE: Any Ion 1.1 document with macros can be fully-expanded into an equivalent Ion 1.0 document.

We’ll streamline future examples with a couple conventions.  First, assume that any E-expression
is occurring within an Ion 1.1 document; due to the unquoted colon, that form is a syntax error

> in Ion 1.0 context! Second, we’ll use the relation ⇒ to mean “expands to”, so we can say:

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
We’ll streamline future examples with a couple conventions.  First, assume that any E-expression
is occurring within an Ion 1.1 document;
second, we’ll use the relation notation, `⇒`, to mean “expands to”.  So we can say:
```

----
(:pi) ⇒ 3.141592653589793
----

=== Simple Templates

> Most macros are of course non-constant.  Since macros are mathematically functional, this implies

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
Most macros are of course non-constant and can be thought of as functions.  This implies
```

Author: The "most macros" seems to suggest that _some_ macros are not functions.

Reviewer: I read your text as meaning that "non-constant" applied to the subject "Most macros."  If you think this is confusing, I would factor this out into a separate sentence.

Author: How the short and sweet

```
Most macros are not constant, they accept inputs that determine their results.
```

that they can accept inputs that determine their results.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* price
  [a, c]                          // signature
  { amount: a, currency: c })     // template
----
----
(:price 99 USD) ⇒ { amount: 99, currency: USD }
----

This macro has a non-trivial signature that declares two parameters, named `a` and `c`, and it

> therefore accepts two arguments when invoked.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
This macro has a signature that declares two parameters, named `a` and `c`, and it
therefore accepts two arguments when invoked.
```

NOTE: For reasons that will soon be more clear, we will be careful to distinguish between the
views from “inside” and “outside” the macro: _parameters_ are the names used by a macro’s
implementation to refer to its expansion-time inputs, while _arguments_ are the data provided to a
macro at the point of invocation. In other words, we have “formal” parameters and “actual”

> arguments.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
NOTE: We are careful to distinguish between the
views from “inside” and “outside” the macro: _parameters_ are the names used by a macro’s
implementation to refer to its expansion-time inputs, while _arguments_ are the data provided to a
macro at the point of invocation. In other words, we have “formal” parameters and “actual”
arguments.
```

Compared to the constant `pi` above, the body of this macro is suddenly interesting.  The struct
therein is our first non-trivial _template_, an expression in Ion’s new domain-specific language

> for defining macro functions.  This expression language treats Ion scalar values (except for

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
The struct
in this macro is our first non-trivial _template_, an expression in Ion’s new domain-specific language
for defining macro functions.  This expression language treats Ion scalar values (except for
```

symbols) as literals, giving the decimal in ``pi``’s template its intended meaning.  Expressions

> that are structs are interpreted as quasi-literals: the field names are literal, but the field

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
that are structs are interpreted as _quasi-literals_: the field names are literal, but the field
```

“values” are arbitrary expressions.  This is why the `amount` and `currency` field names show up
as-is in the expansion.  The sub-expressions in this template demonstrate that the expression
language treats symbols as variable references.  Here, `a` and `c` in the template refer to the
parameters of the macro, and during expansion they are “filled in” with the values supplied by

> the invoking E-expression.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.  Chose to be more generic here because we can invoke these from other macros in non-E-expression contexts.

```suggestion
parameters of the macro, and during expansion they are “filled in” with the values supplied by
the invocation of the macro.
```

The template language also treats lists quasi-literally, and every element inside the list is an
expression.  Here’s a silly macro to illustrate:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* reverse [a, b] [b, a])
----
----
(:reverse first {amount:a, currency:c}) ⇒ [{amount:a, currency:c}, first]
----

To point out what may be obvious, note that the `a` in the E-expression is _not_ part of the
expression language and not a reference to the macro’s first parameter or any other named entity.

> From the point of view of ``reverse``’s template, the input struct is literal data.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
Note that the `a` in the E-expression is _not_ part of the
expression language and not a reference to the macro’s first parameter or any other named entity.
From the point of view of ``reverse``’s template, the input struct is literal data.
```

E-expressions can nest, so we could also encode the same data using `price`:

----
(:reverse first (:price a c)) ⇒ [{amount:a, currency:c}, first]
----

=== Invoking Macros from Templates

So the template language treats symbols as parameter references, other scalars as literals, and

> structs and lists as quasi-literals, but what about S-expressions?

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion. I would just eliminate  this sentence--I'm not sure it is doing much when compared to the following paragraph.

Author: I'll pull up the next sentence.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* website_url
  [path]
  (make_string "https://www.amazon.com/" path))
----

Template expressions that are S-expressions are operator invocations, where the operators are
either special forms or macro invocations.  In this case, it’s the latter: an invocation of the
system macro (_i.e._, built-in function) `make_string`, which concatenates its arguments to produce

> a single string:

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
Template expressions that are S-expressions are _operator invocations_, where the operators are
either _special forms_ or _macro invocations_.  In this case, it’s the latter: an invocation of the
system macro (i.e., built-in function) `make_string`, which concatenates its arguments to produce
a single string:
```

Author: What style guide do we use?  I think most say that "i.e." (and "e.g.") is a Latin abbreviation and should therefore be italicized.

(I'm also okay avoiding both, if we wish.)

Author: I'm eliminating all ie and eg per AWS style guide.

Reviewer: We don't have one, we probably should.  I generally just write "i.e.," and "e.g.," as-is without formatting, but happy to adapt to whatever.  Also, if we use "i.e.," we should not use "aka" elsewhere.

----
(:website_url "gp/cart") ⇒ "https://www.amazon.com/gp/cart"
----

In the template language, macro invocations can appear almost anywhere:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* detail_page_url
  [asin]
  (website_url (make_string "dp/" asin)))
----
----
(:detail_page_url "B08KTZ8249") ⇒ "https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08KTZ8249"
----

> NOTE: While this doesn’t look like much of an improvement, the full string takes 38 to encode, but

Reviewer 4: 38 bytes

> the macro invocation can be encoded with as few as 12 bytes.

Reviewer: Isn't as few as 11 bytes (e.g., single byte e-expression + 10 bytes of string)?

Author: Plus one byte for the string length, right?

=== Special Form: `*literal*`

To explain more carefully, when a template-expression is syntactically an S-expression, its first
element must be a symbol that matches either a set of keywords denoting the special forms, or the
name of a previously-defined macro.  The interpretation of the S-expression’s remaining elements
depends on how the symbol resolves.  In the case of macro invocations, we’ve seen above that the
following elements are (so far!) arbitrary template expressions, but for special forms that’s not

> always the case. The `*literal*` form makes this clear:

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
When a template-expression is syntactically an S-expression, its first
element must be a symbol that matches either a set of keywords denoting the special forms, or the
name of a previously-defined macro.  The interpretation of the S-expression’s remaining elements
depends on how the symbol resolves.  In the case of macro invocations, we’ve seen above that the
following elements are (so far!) arbitrary template expressions, but for special forms that’s not
always the case. The `*literal*` form makes this clear:
```

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* USD_price [dollars] (price dollars (*literal* USD)))
----
----
(:USD_price 12.99) ⇒ { amount: 12.99, currency: USD }
----

In this template, we can’t just write `(price dollars USD)` because the symbol `USD` would be
treated as an unbound variable reference and a syntax error, so we turn it into literal data by
“escaping” it with `*literal*`.

TIP: Our documents use bold typewriter face to distinguish special forms and keywords from symbols
referencing macros and parameters.

The critical point is that special forms are “special” precisely because they cannot be expressed

> as macros and must therefore receive bespoke syntactic treatment.  Since the elements of

Reviewer: I'm not sure there is "bespoke syntactic treatment" is there?  I think the evaluation/semantics are different...

Author: I think you're making a point too fine for me to see.  Can you elaborate?

I'd say special forms can have both special parsing (for example, parenthesis can be part of the special form's bespoke syntax, not an expression) _and_ custom evaluation semantics.

Reviewer 3: I think Almann is saying that there is bespoke evaluation/semantics for `(literal ...)`, but it's not really a bespoke syntax since it looks like the syntax for any other macro.

Author: It depends what you see as "syntax".  I think you're looking at the Ion grammar as the syntax, but that's effectively meta-syntax for the template language, which has its own grammar atop Ion's, thus its own syntax where `literal` is a keyword, not an expression.

macro-invocation expressions are themselves expressions, when you want something to _not_ be
evaluated that way, it must be a special form.

Finally, these special forms are part of the template language itself, and are not visible to
encoded data: the E-expression `(:literal foo)` must necessarily refer to some user-defined macro
named `literal`, not to this special form.  (There’s also no need for such a form in
E-expressions, because in that context symbols and S-expressions are not “evaluated”, and

> everything is literal except for E-expressions (which are not data, but encoding artifacts).)

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
named `literal`, not to this special form.  As an aside, there is no need for such a form in
E-expressions, because in that context symbols and S-expressions are not “evaluated”, and
everything is literal except for E-expressions (which are not data, but encoding artifacts).
```

=== Parameter Types

In our examples so far, the macro signatures have been simple lists of parameter names, and each
parameter accepts a value of any type.  But this is often undesirable, since the resulting output

> could be schematically malformed, or worse(?), macro-expansion could fail in hard-to-diagnose ways:

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
could violate the intended schema or the macro-expansion could fail in hard-to-diagnose ways:
```

[{mrk}]
----
(:detail_page_url [true]) ⇒ _**error**: make_string expects a string_
----

This E-expression cannot be expanded because `make_string` requires its arguments to be textual
values, and `[true]` is not a string or symbol.  But this failure happens within the
implementation of `detail_page_url`, not the point where the error occurred.  In this example
those points are only one step removed, but it’s not hard to imagine macros where the stack is

> deep enough to make diagnosis quite difficult.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
implementation of `detail_page_url`, not the point where the error occurred.  In this example,
those points are only one step removed, but it’s not hard to imagine macros where the call stack is
deep enough to make diagnosis difficult.
```

To detect problems close to their source, macro signatures can declare type constraints on their parameters:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* detail_page_url
  [(*string* asin)]
  (website_url (make_string "dp/" asin)))
----

> Here we constrain the `asin` parameter to produce a string so the blame is more clear:

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
Here we constrain the `asin` parameter to produce a string so the intent is clear and the Ion parser can emit an error sooner:
```

[{mrk}]
----
(:detail_page_url [true]) ⇒ _**error**: detail_page_url expects a string_
----

These types also serve a second, perhaps more impactful, purpose: they can allow the binary

> encoding to be more compact by omitting type information or using fixed-width values.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
These types also serve a second purpose: they can allow the binary
encoding to be more compact by omitting typed encoding or using fixed-width values.
```

Author: The phrase "omitting typed encoding" is weird.  What feels wrong about "type information"?

Reviewer: I guess my only issue with it is the where the type information lies.  It isn't omitted per se, but encoded statically--I am fine with this as is.

Author: How about "...more compact by avoiding type tags or using fixed-width values"?

This example reveals additional syntax for parameter declarations.  So far, a parameter was
declared by a symbol denoting its name, now we have an S-expression pairing a type and a name.
In this context the types include all the normal “concrete” Ion types, plus some useful abstract

> supertypes like `*number*`, `*text*`, and `*lob*`, as well as the unconstrained “top type” `*any*`.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
In this context the types include all the normal “concrete” Ion types, abstract
supertypes like `*number*`, `*text*`, and `*lob*`, and the unconstrained “top type” `*any*`.
```

The latter is the default type, so the signature `[foo]` is equivalent to `[(*any* foo)]` meaning
that the parameter `foo` accepts any value.

> === Cardinality: Rest Parameters

Reviewer 4: As someone who's not familiar with the literature that "rest parameters" probably comes from, it just makes me sleepy when I see it. Maybe we could wake readers up by quickly saying something like "rest parameters, as in: 'all the rest of them'".

Author: I reworked the first sentence to get there quickly.

Reviewer 3: If it's not too late to change terminology, "Variadic" might be more helpful term than "Rest". "Rest" has a lot of different meanings, and _my_ initial thought was that you were trying to draw a comparison to URL parameters in a REST API. "Variadic" on the other hand, borders on being jargon, but it has a relatively unambiguous meaning that should be familiar to the target audience.

Author: I think the term doesn't map well to this language's stream-nature, so I avoided it.

"Variadic" is ambiguous here due to the rules around omitting trailing voidable arguments.  It's the _macro_ that's variadic (ie, it accepts a variable number of arguments), due to the cardinality of one or more arguments.

PS it's not too late to change terminology, so keep the critique coming.

Reviewer 3: That makes sense. I see how "variadic" would be ambiguous.

I also remembered that JS/TS uses "Rest Parameters", so I guess it should be familiar to a lot of the target audience.

Some macros can accept an arbitrary number of arguments.  The `make_string` macro is one of those,
concatenating zero or more arguments into a single string:

----
(:make_string)                 ⇒ ""
(:make_string "a")             ⇒ "a"
(:make_string "a" "b"    )     ⇒ "ab"
(:make_string "a" "b" "c")     ⇒ "abc"
(:make_string "a" "b" "c" "d") ⇒ "abcd"
----

To make this work, the definition of make_string is effectively:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* make_string [(*text \...* parts)] …)
----

This says that `parts` is a _rest parameter_ accepting zero or more arguments of type `*text*`.
The `*\...*` modifier can only occur on the last parameter, declaring that “all the rest” of the
arguments will be passed to that one name.

NOTE: The Ion grammar treats identifiers like `text` and operators like `\...` as separate tokens
even when juxtaposed like `text\...`. The template language syntax leverages that, and we’ll use the

> latter representation from now on.

Reviewer: I don't quite understand what this note is saying.  Are you saying that `text...` and `...text` are synonyms in the macro language?  If so,  why bother with that flexibility?

Reviewer 3: I think it's clarifying that `text \...` and `text\...` are equivalent.
```suggestion
NOTE: The Ion grammar treats identifiers like `text` and operators like `\...` as separate tokens
regardless of whether they are separated by whitespace. 
```

Author: Matthew is correct.

> At this point our distinction between parameters and arguments starts showing its value, since

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion--value is somewhat overloaded in this doc.

```suggestion
At this point our distinction between parameters and arguments becomes apparent, since
```

                                    {amount:2, currency:GBP}
                                    {amount:3, currency:GBP}
                                    {amount:4, currency:GBP}
----

==== one-or-more

A one-or-more `*+*` parameter works just like `***` except the resulting stream must produce at
least one value.  To continue abusing our prices example:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* prices
  [(*number+* amount), (*symbol* currency)]
  (*for_each* amount
    (price amount currency)))
----

[{mrk}]
----
(:prices () JPY) ⇒ _**error**: at least one value expected for + parameter_
(:prices [99] EUR)               ⇒ {amount:99, currency:EUR}
(:prices \((:) (:values 99)) EUR) ⇒ {amount:99, currency:EUR}
----

Note that among the delimited expressions, empty results are fine, as long as their concatenation
produces one or more values.

=== Optional Arguments

When a trailing parameter is voidable, an invocation can omit its corresponding argument, as long
as no following parameter is being given a value.  We’ve seen this as applied to rest-parameters,
but it also applies to `*?*` and `***` cardinality:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* optionals

>   [(*any** a), (*any?* b), (*any!* c), (*any** d), (*any?* e), (*any\...* f)]

Reviewer 4: The `*` escaping is getting screwed up on this line. I'm seeing `*any?` in the rendered view, and most of it is bold.

Author: Fixed.

[[sec:macroexample]]
== Macros by Example

:mrk: subs="+normal"

> Before getting into the technical details of Ion’s macro and module system, it’ll help to be more

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before getting into the technical details of Ion’s macro and module system, it will help to be more
```
Contractions make the document less approachable for people who are non-native English speakers.

familiar with the _use_ of macros.  We’ll step through increasingly sophisticated use cases, some
admittedly synthetic for illustrative purposes, with the intent of teaching the core concepts and
moving parts without getting into the weeds of more formal specification.

=== Constants

The most basic macro is a constant:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* pi []
  3.141592653589793)
----

This declaration—taken recklessly out of context to keep things simple—defines a public macro
named `pi`.  The `[]` is the macro’s signature, in this case a trivial one that declares no
parameters.  The macro therefore accepts no arguments and always returns the obvious value.

To use this macro in a document, we write an _encoding expression_, aka E-expression:

[{mrk}]
----
*$ion_1_1*
(:pi)
----

The syntax `(:pi)` looks a lot like an S-expression.  It’s not, though, since colons

> cannot appear unquoted in that context.  Ion 1.1 makes use of what’s invalid syntax in Ion

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cannot appear unquoted in that context.  Ion 1.1 makes use of syntax that is not valid in Ion
```

“values” are arbitrary expressions.  This is why the `amount` and `currency` field names show up
as-is in the expansion.  The sub-expressions in this template demonstrate that the expression
language treats symbols as variable references.  Here, `a` and `c` in the template refer to the
parameters of the macro, and during expansion they are “filled in” with the values supplied by
the invoking E-expression.

The template language also treats lists quasi-literally, and every element inside the list is an
expression.  Here’s a silly macro to illustrate:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* reverse [a, b] [b, a])
----
----
(:reverse first {amount:a, currency:c}) ⇒ [{amount:a, currency:c}, first]
----

To point out what may be obvious, note that the `a` in the E-expression is _not_ part of the
expression language and not a reference to the macro’s first parameter or any other named entity.
From the point of view of ``reverse``’s template, the input struct is literal data.

E-expressions can nest, so we could also encode the same data using `price`:

----
(:reverse first (:price a c)) ⇒ [{amount:a, currency:c}, first]

> ----

Reviewer 3: What about these? Does this work?
```
(:reverse first { foo: (:price a c)} ) ⇒ ?
(:reverse first [(:price a c)] ) ⇒ ?
```

Author: `reverse` accepts any shape and type of argument, so yes those work:

```
(:reverse first { foo: (:price a c)} )
   ⇒ (:reverse first { foo: {amount:a, currency:c}} )
   ⇒ [ { foo: {amount:a, currency:c}}, first ]

(:reverse first [(:price a c)] )
   ⇒ (:reverse first [{amount:a, currency:c}] )
   ⇒ [[{amount:a, currency:c}], first]
```

Was there something ambiguous that led to your question?

Author: I'm adding to the existing example to show the intermediate steps and be explicit that expansion happens from "inside out" when there's nesting like this.

Reviewer 3: > Was there something ambiguous that led to your question?

I'm not sure actually... I think it was either:

* I was just trying to clarify if E-expressions could nest inside other things that were nested in an E-expression.
* I was just trying to figure out what was meant by "quasi-literally" and "every element inside the list is an expression". I was still confused about some of the terminology at this point in my first read-through. (And, yes, I do realize now that my question wasn't even the right question if this is what I was after.)

Reviewer 5: > I was just trying to figure out what was meant by "quasi-literally"

"Quasi-quoting" is another phrase that's [widely used in Scheme/Lisp](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/quasiquote.html) but may be unfamiliar to a broader audience.

I think the text has already been updated to expand on the meaning of "quasi-literals" (I'm still catching up!) but if not, it wouldn't hurt to spell it out.

=== Invoking Macros from Templates

So the template language treats symbols as parameter references, other scalars as literals, and
structs and lists as quasi-literals, but what about S-expressions?

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* website_url
  [path]
  (make_string "https://www.amazon.com/" path))
----

Template expressions that are S-expressions are operator invocations, where the operators are
either special forms or macro invocations.  In this case, it’s the latter: an invocation of the

> system macro (_i.e._, built-in function) `make_string`, which concatenates its arguments to produce

Reviewer 3: Is there a list/reference of system macros available somewhere?

a single string:

----
(:website_url "gp/cart") ⇒ "https://www.amazon.com/gp/cart"
----

In the template language, macro invocations can appear almost anywhere:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* detail_page_url
  [asin]
  (website_url (make_string "dp/" asin)))
----
----
(:detail_page_url "B08KTZ8249") ⇒ "https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08KTZ8249"
----

NOTE: While this doesn’t look like much of an improvement, the full string takes 38 bytes to encode,
but the macro invocation takes as few as 12 bytes.

> === Special Form: `*literal*`

Reviewer 3: Is it too late to reconsider this terminology? Could we call them "macro operators" or something a little more informational than "special forms"?

Author: I'm open to suggestions, but "special forms" is pretty standard AFAIK.  These are explicitly not macros, nor functions.  They are syntax forms, with dedicated clauses in the expression-language grammar.  I avoided "syntax forms" because `{ ... }` and `[ ... ]` are also syntax forms with grammar clauses that control what portions of that syntax are expressions versus literals versus keywords and such.

Reviewer: Special forms are definitely in the literature from Scheme/Lisp.  I am okay with this, but "Macro operators" are too vague, and these do things I wouldn't expect "operators" to do.

Reviewer 5: FWIW, I was also initially unfamiliar with the term "special forms." I suggest adding a brief definition of the phrase at the start of this section for readers who aren't steeped in Scheme/Lisp.

> To explain more carefully, when a template-expression is syntactically an S-expression, its first

Reviewer 3: _Minor_—Editorial suggestion:
```suggestion
When a template-expression is syntactically an S-expression, its first
```

element must be a symbol that matches either a set of keywords denoting the special forms, or the

> name of a previously-defined macro.  The interpretation of the S-expression’s remaining elements

Reviewer 3: > or the name of a previously defined macro

Is this something different than the `(:` syntax to invoke a macro? (Or in other words, are we conflating S-expressions and E-expressions here?)

Author: These forms are _very_ different, even _critically_ different.  The template language is expressed via the Ion data model, and there are no E-expressions in Ion data. They've all been expanded away by the time macros are compiled.

I need to write a section about these different processing phases, but It seems prematurely pedantic for this document.

Reviewer 3: > I need to write a section about these different processing phases, but It seems prematurely pedantic for this document.

It might be prematurely pedantic to introduce all of the processing phases, but it is definitely not to early to explain that the template DSL is Ion data, and so when one template invokes another, it does so with a S-Expression and not an E-Expression.

Follow-up question—how do we write a template that creates an S-Expression? Something like this?
```
// This is getting out of hand!
(public now_there_are_two_of_them [(any arg0)] (literal (arg0 arg0)) )
```
How is it evaluated?
```
(:now_there_are_two_of_them sith) ⇒ (sith sith)
// or
(:now_there_are_two_of_them sith) ⇒ (arg0 arg0)
```

Author: ```
(public now_there_are_two_of_them [(any arg0)] (literal (arg0 arg0)) )
```
That's a constant that always produces the literal sexp `(arg0 arg0)` regardless of its inputs, because that's what's "quoted" by `literal`.

To construct an S-expression in a template, you need to use the built-in constructor macro `make_sexp`:

```
(public now_there_are_two_of_them [(any arg0)] (make_sexp arg0))
```

Author: I'm adding a paragraph to the very top talking about the DSL-as-data aspect, and a new subsection here talking more about the distinctions.

depends on how the symbol resolves.  In the case of macro invocations, we’ve seen above that the
following elements are (so far!) arbitrary template expressions, but for special forms that’s not
always the case. The `*literal*` form makes this clear:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* USD_price [dollars] (price dollars (*literal* USD)))
----
----
(:USD_price 12.99) ⇒ { amount: 12.99, currency: USD }
----

In this template, we can’t just write `(price dollars USD)` because the symbol `USD` would be
treated as an unbound variable reference and a syntax error, so we turn it into literal data by
“escaping” it with `*literal*`.

> TIP: Our documents use bold typewriter face to distinguish special forms and keywords from symbols

Reviewer 3: Is it actually all of our documents, or should it say "this document"?

Author: Well, we should be consistent in all our docs, so I'm trying to set a standard I guess.

referencing macros and parameters.

The critical point is that special forms are “special” precisely because they cannot be expressed
as macros and must therefore receive bespoke syntactic treatment.  Since the elements of
macro-invocation expressions are themselves expressions, when you want something to _not_ be
evaluated that way, it must be a special form.

> Finally, these special forms are part of the template language itself, and are not visible to

Reviewer 3: Somewhere around here, we should have a link to a reference of all special forms once such a resource is available.

If not, then maybe include a parenthetical note to the effect of:
> (The special forms in Ion 1.1 are `literal`, `for_each`, and `if_void`.)

That way the reader may still wonder what they mean, but they at least know the number and name of the special forms.

Author: Yes we should.  We have a lot more documentation to push into GitHub, and as they do I want to backfill links and cross-references as appropriate.  :-)

(:make_string "a" "b"    )     ⇒ "ab"
(:make_string "a" "b" "c")     ⇒ "abc"
(:make_string "a" "b" "c" "d") ⇒ "abcd"
----

To make this work, the definition of make_string is effectively:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* make_string [(*text \...* parts)] …)
----

This says that `parts` is a _rest parameter_ accepting zero or more arguments of type `*text*`.
The `*\...*` modifier can only occur on the last parameter, declaring that “all the rest” of the
arguments will be passed to that one name.

NOTE: The Ion grammar treats identifiers like `text` and operators like `\...` as separate tokens
even when juxtaposed like `text\...`. The template language syntax leverages that, and we’ll use the
latter representation from now on.

At this point our distinction between parameters and arguments starts showing its value, since
they are no longer one-to-one: this macro with one parameter can be invoked with one argument, or
twenty, or none. We describe the acceptable number of arguments for a parameter as its
_cardinality_.  In the examples so far, all parameters have had _exactly-one_ cardinality, while
`parts` has _zero-or-more_ cardinality.  We’ll see additional cardinalities soon!

> === Templates Transform Streams

Reviewer 3: Is "Transform" a verb or a noun-adjunct in this title? (Can you rephrase it to remove the grammatical ambiguity?)

Reviewer 3: Now that I've stewed on this a while, I think I realize that this means "Templates perform transformations on streams". I think I was confused because this section heading is a `subject-verb-object`, whereas most (maybe all) of the other section headings are `modifier*-noun`.

And (I'm sorry if this is too pedantic), but is it the templates that transform streams, or is it the macro that transforms streams by applying the template to stream elements? I can see that macro is defined (in part) by a template—but what exactly is the relationship between templates and macros?

Author: I'll rework this section.

Rest-parameters raise a question: what happens when a template references a parameter that was
given more than one argument?  The answer revolves around a unique aspect of Ion’s macro system

> and template language: the inputs to and the output from a macro are streams of values,

Reviewer 3: Editorial suggestion—I was initially confused by the rhetorical flourishes at the start of this paragraph (but that might just be me).
```suggestion
The inputs to and the output from a macro are streams of values,
```

constrained in size by cardinality declarations.  When a macro is invoked, each parameter is

> bound to a stream of values, and the use of the parameter’s name is a reference to that stream,

Reviewer 3: Editorial suggestion to add a little more context. I don't know if "definition" is the correct term here, but I think the expanded phrasing helps to clarify that the use of the parameter name is occurring in the definition of the macro rather than at the macro invocation site.
```suggestion
bound to a stream of values, and within the macro definition, each parameter’s name is a reference to that stream,
```

not to a specific value.  The declared cardinality of a parameter constrains the number of
elements produced by its stream, and is verified by the macro expansion system.

More generally, the template language itself is stream-oriented, and the results of template
expressions are streams.  While most expression forms produce exactly-one value, various macros

> and special forms can produce zero or more values.

Reviewer 3: Minor suggestion—I don't think you _need_ to hyphenate "exactly-one", but if you are going to hyphenate it, then you may want to also hyphenate "zero-or-more" for consistency.

Author: I've been using hyphenation when used with "cardinality"  like "zero-or-more cardinality".  Here its a typo.  Thanks for your keen eye!

We have everything we need to illustrate, via another system macro, `values`:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* values [(*any\...* vals)] vals)
----
----
(:values 1)           ⇒ 1
(:values 1 true null) ⇒ 1 true null

> (:values)             ⇒ _nothing_

Reviewer 3: This is actually `void` (even though void hasn't been introduced yet), right?

Author: Yes.

Reviewer 3: I think that `void` is a common enough term that you can introduce it here without needing a full explanation. (The benefit being that we have consistent terminology instead of using "nothing" and then later switching to "void".)
```suggestion
(:values)             ⇒ _void_ 
```
If you want, you could add a sentence at L308 to the effect of:
> Note that _`void`_ is used to refer to an empty stream, which is the output when `values` has no arguments.

rest-parameter to `make_string`, using indentation to clarify the nesting:

----
(:make_string (:values)
              a
              (:values b
                       (:values c)
                       d)
              e)                   ⇒ "abcde"
----

Inlining within sequences is straightforward, but structs are trickier due to their key/value
nature.  When used in field-value position, each result from a macro is bound to the field-name
independently, leading to the field being repeated or even absent:

----
{ name: (:values) }     ⇒ { }
{ name: (:values v) }   ⇒ { name: v }
{ name: (:values v w) } ⇒ { name: v, name: w }
----

An E-expression can even be used in place of a key-value pair, in which case it must return
structs, which are merged into the surrounding container:

[{mrk}]
----
{ a:1, (:values), z:3 }             ⇒ { a:1, z:3 }
{ a:1, (:values {}), z:3 }          ⇒ { a:1, z:3 }
{ a:1, (:values {b:2}), z:3 }       ⇒ { a:1, b:2, z:3 }
{ a:1, (:values {b:2} {z:3}), z:3 } ⇒ { a:1, b:2, z:3, z:3 }

{ a:1, (:values key "value") } ⇒ _**error**: struct expected for inlining into struct_
----

> ==== Inlining in template expressions

Reviewer 3: _Minor nitpick_—some of your section headings are in title case, and others are in sentence case. It would be nice (though not essential) if they were consistent one way or the other.

Author: Fair enough.  I should go find the AWS style guide...

The preceding examples demonstrate inlining of E-expressions into encoded data, but similar
stream-inlining occurs within the template language, making it trivial to convert a stream to a
list:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* int_list
  [(**int\...** vals)]
  [ vals ])
(*public* clumsy_bag
  [(**any\...** elts)]
  { '': elts })
----
----
(:int_list)   ⇒ []
(:clumsy_bag) ⇒ {}

(:int_list 1 2 3)    ⇒ [1, 2, 3]
(:clumsy_bag true 2) ⇒ {'':true, '':2}
----

As a reminder, streams and lists are different, there’s no flattening involved, and declared
types are verified:

[{mrk}]
----
(:int_list 1 [2] 3) ⇒ _**error**: [2] is not an int_
----

TODO: demonstrate inlining in TDL macro invocations

=== Mapping Templates Over Streams

Another way to produce a stream is via a mapping form. The `*for_each*` special form evaluates a
template once for each value provided by a macro parameter.  Each time, the parameter name is

> shadowed and rebound to the next value on the stream.

Reviewer 3: > Each time, the parameter name is shadowed and rebound to the next value on the stream.

I'm not sure exactly what this is saying, but I think the overall intent of `for_each` seems clear without this sentence. Can we just leave it out or is it trying to deal with some ambiguity that I'm not seeing?

Author: It's trying to be clear that the form is introducing local variables.

BTW this form is very likely to change before things are finalized, to be more general and flexible.

Reviewer: I agree that this is a little fuzzy, but I think that is more an artifact of `for_each` being defined as creating a local that shadows.  The fact that we have to explain this makes me think this is a less than ideal design for the language.

Author: I'll rework this syntax form and section in a later revision.

Reviewer 3: Suggestion: bind a local variable like this?
```
(public grid
  [(int\...* number)]
  (make_list
    (for_each x::number
      (make_list
        (for_each y::number
          (add x y)))))  // I don't know if "add" actually exists, but let's pretend that it does for this example
```
```
(:grid 1 2 3) ⇒ [
                  [ 2, 3, 4 ],
                  [ 3, 4, 5 ],
                  [ 4, 5, 6 ],
                ]
```

Regardless of the actual approach taken, I think we should be able to explicitly choose a name the local binding, and I think the default binding name (if there is a default) should be different than the parameter name.

Author: See #198 for replacement content that iterates multiple streams with "real" local variable names.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* prices
  [(*symbol* currency), (*number\...* amount)]
  (*for_each* amount
    (price amount currency)))
----
----
(:prices GBP 10 9.99 12.)
⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP} {amount:12., currency:GBP}
----

TODO: Consider the more-general binding form

=== Empty Streams: `*void*`

To wrap up our discussion of streams, we have another important built-in macro: `void` accepts
no values and produces no value. In other words, it’s a constant, the empty stream:

----
(:int_list (:void)) ⇒ []
(:int_list 1 (:void) 2) ⇒ [1, 2]
[(:void)]   ⇒ []
{a:(:void)} ⇒ {}
----

When used as a macro argument, a `void` invocation (like any other expression) counts as one
argument, albeit one with no value(s).

[{mrk}]
----
(:pi (:void)) ⇒ _**error**: 'pi' expects 0 arguments, given 1_
----

Void is important because we need something outside the Ion data model to express that Ion data
doesn't exist.  We can’t use null because `null` is a value!  In much the same way that Ion
differentiates a null-field from an absent field (_e.g._, `{a:null}` versus `{}`), macros need to

> differentiate the absence of value from all other values in the Ion data model.

Reviewer 3: We can't use `null`, but could we use `(:values)`? Is `(:void)` essentially a synonym of `(:values)` (specifically with no args) that conveys a particular intention?

Author: I think you've got it right there.  `void` is basically a no-argument version of `values` that's IMO more clear for that use and easier to talk about.

Reviewer: I don't like that we have all this "special case" text around `(:void)` it's not special, it is just the empty stream and we should talk about it that way.

We’ll use the term _void_ most accurately as a synonym for “empty stream”, but you might catch us
talking as if void were a value, when it’s actually no value at all.  We’ll even mint the word
_voidable_ to describe parameters that can accept zero values, like the ``*\...*``s above. This
neologism will prove useful, you’ll see.

To really nail the point home: the special-case E-expression `(:)` is synonymous with `(:void)`

> and exists solely as a more-pleasant argument expression for voidable parameters.

Reviewer 3: _Minor_—Editorial suggestion:
```suggestion
The special-case E-expression `(:)` is synonymous with `(:void)`
and exists solely as a more succinct argument expression for voidable parameters.
```

=== Other Cardinalities

For a language that’s thoroughly stream-oriented, rest-parameters don’t offer much flexibility
with respect to cardinality.  The `*\...*` modifier can only be the final parameter, meaning that
only that parameter can be invoked with more than one subexpression and produce more than one
value.  So far other parameters must have exactly-one value, which is fairly limiting.

> 

Reviewer 3: _Minor_—Editorial suggestion:
```suggestion
```

Author: I've reworked this paragraph significantly.

In fact, the macro system provides four distinct cardinality constraints: exactly-one,
zero-or-one, zero-or-more, and one-or-more.  They each have modifier symbols that can be used in
signatures, namely `*!*`, `*?*`, `***`, and `*+*`. The former is the default, so the signatures

> `[arg]`, `[(*any* arg)]`, and `[(*any!* arg)]` are all equivalent.

Reviewer 3: * Suggest using a table so that people don't have to correlate the two prose lists.
* Suggest not using "former" in relation to a list of four elements.
* Suggest putting rest-parameters into the table.
```suggestion
The macro system provides five distinct cardinality constraints, which can be used in the signature of a macro. 
[cols="1,1"]
|===
|Cardinality|Name
| `*!*`     |exactly-one 
| `*?*`     |zero-or-one 
| `***`     |zero-or-more 
| `*+*`     |one-or-more 
| `*\...*`  |rest-parameters
|===
Exactly-one is the default, so the signatures `[arg]`, `[(*any* arg)]`, and `[(*any!* arg)]` are all equivalent.
```

==== zero-or-one

The zero-or-one cardinality, denoted in signatures by the modifier `*?*`, is much like the default
exactly-one cardinality, except the parameter is voidable.  That is, it accepts an empty-stream
argument as a way to denote an absent parameter.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* temperature
  [(*decimal* degrees), (*symbol?* scale)]
  {degrees: degrees, scale: scale})
----

Since the scale is voidable, we can pass it void:

----
(:temperature 96 F)    ⇒ {degrees:96, scale:F}
(:temperature 283 (:)) ⇒ {degrees:283}
----

Note that the result’s `scale` field has disappeared because no value was provided.  It would be
more useful to fill in a default value, and to do that we introduce another special form that can
detect void:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* temperature
  [(*decimal* degrees), (*symbol?* scale)]
  {degrees: degrees, scale: (*if_void* scale (*literal* K) scale)})
----
----
(:temperature 96 F)    ⇒ {degrees:96,  scale:F}
(:temperature 283 (:)) ⇒ {degrees:283, scale:K}
----

> The `*if_void*` form is if/then/else syntax testing stream emptiness. It has three sub-expressions,

Reviewer 3: It might be useful to have an `if_many` form to test if a stream has more than one value. Not only does that add a certain _je ne sais quoi_ (maybe it's the symmetry—`if_void -> |x| < 1` and `if_many -> |x| > 1`), but it also makes some use cases easier where you may want to the template to behave differently for 1 item vs multiple stream items. For example:
```
(public decimal_constraints
    [(int* precision), (any* exponent)]
    {
        precision: (if_many precision range::[precision] precision),
        exponent: (if_many exponent range::[exponent] exponent),
    })
```
```
(:decimal_constraints (3) (-1))     ⇒ { precision: 3, exponent: -1 }
(:decimal_constraints (1 5) (-5 0)) ⇒ { precision: range::[1, 5], exponent: range::[-5, 0] }
(:decimal_constraints (:) (3 max))  ⇒ { exponent: range::[3, max] }
(:decimal_constraints (1) (:))      ⇒ { precision: 1, }
```

It's always possible to get a similar sort of effect by having two parameters in place of one. Instead of `(any* foo)`, we could use `(any? foo0), (any* foo1)`, but now the invocation is more unwieldy and anyone creating a macro has to decide how to handle more cases (since either of `foo0` and `foo1` could be void).

Author: That's a great idea!  I've added this to the doc describing the template language special forms.

returned.

NOTE: Exactly one branch is expanded, because otherwise the void stream might be used in a context
that requires a value, resulting in an errant expansion error.

To refine things a bit further, trailing voidable arguments can be omitted entirely:

----
(:temperature 283) ⇒ {degrees:283, scale:K}
----

==== zero-or-more

A zero-or-more `***` parameter is identical in meaning to our friend `*\...*` from the perspective
of its template, but it can be used in any position, not just last place.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* prices
  [(*number** amount), (*symbol* currency)]
  (*for_each* amount
    (price amount currency)))
----

From the perspective of the invoker, the calling convention is different since the “all the rest”
convention can’t be used to draw the boundaries of the stream.  Instead, we use a list or
S-expression as a delimiting container to group the applicable sub-expressions:

[{mrk}]
----
(:prices () JPY)         ⇒ _void_
(:prices (10  9.99) GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP}
(:prices [10, 9.99] GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP}

> ----

Reviewer 3: I was confused by this at first, and I think it may benefit from combining the two paragraphs and by being a little more direct.
```suggestion
A zero-or-more `***` parameter is identical in meaning to `*\...*`, but the usage is slightly different. A zero-or-more parameter can be used in any position. However, the arguments to a zero-or-more parameter must be grouped in a delimiting container (i.e. a List or S-expression) at the invocation site.
[{mrk}]
----
(*public* prices
  [(*number** amount), (*symbol* currency)]
  (*for_each* amount
    (price amount currency)))
----
----
(:prices () JPY)         ⇒ _void_
(:prices (10  9.99) GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP}
(:prices [10, 9.99] GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP} {amount:9.99, currency:GBP}
----
```

Author: Latest draft reworks much of this, pls take a look.

The delimiting sequence is effectively shorthand for a `values` expression, but arbitrary

> expressions are not allowed:

Reviewer 3: > The delimiting sequence is effectively shorthand for a `values` expression

 If I understand correctly, they are similar in that they are both identity functions for streams, but they have different purposes that cause them to not be interchangeable.

Since you can't use a `values` expression in place of a delimiting sequence, I would recommend not suggesting that one is a shorthand for the other.

However, I'm sure you added this part for a reason—because someone asked if they were the same thing—so some acknowledgement of their similarity is justified. Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
NOTE: Delimiting sequences and `values` expressions may appear similar because they both act like an identity function for streams; however they are not interchangeable:
```

[{mrk}]
----
(:prices (:values 10 9.99 12.) GBP) ⇒ _**error**: delimiting list or sexp expected_
(:prices (:) GBP)                   ⇒ _**error**: delimiting list or sexp expected_
----

That’s because the binary representation of these parameters uses a tagless format for these
delimiters to keep the common case as dense as possible, and it’s not possible to replace that
container with a macro invocation.  The text form mirrors that limitation, but you can always
call a macro inside the delimiter, with no loss of generality:

----
(:prices [(:values 10)] GBP) ⇒ {amount:10, currency:GBP}
----

Note that the delimiter is required even for single values, again for consistency but more

> importantly to avoid ambiguity.  Consider this macro:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the delimiter is required even for single values to avoid ambiguity.  Consider this macro:
```

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* ouch [(*list** stuff)] …)
----

In the E-expression `(:ouch [])`  is that list the delimiting container, or the sole input value?
When expanding the E-expression does `stuff` produce void, or a single empty list?  `***`-arguments
require a delimiting container precisely so there’s no ambiguity, regardless of the element type,
and the answer is that `stuff` is void.

Within the delimiting container, the invocation can have any number of values and/or macro
invocations.  The macro parameter produces the results of those expressions, concatenated into a
single stream, and the expander verifies that each value on that stream is acceptable by the
parameter’s declared type.

----
(:prices (1 (:values 2 3) 4) GBP) ⇒ {amount:1, currency:GBP}
                                    {amount:2, currency:GBP}
                                    {amount:3, currency:GBP}
                                    {amount:4, currency:GBP}
----

==== one-or-more

A one-or-more `*+*` parameter works just like `***` except the resulting stream must produce at

> least one value.  To continue abusing our prices example:

Reviewer 3: _Minor_—Editorial suggestion:
```suggestion
least one value.  To continue using our prices example:
```

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* prices
  [(*number+* amount), (*symbol* currency)]
  (*for_each* amount
    (price amount currency)))
----

[{mrk}]
----
(:prices () JPY) ⇒ _**error**: at least one value expected for + parameter_
(:prices [99] EUR)               ⇒ {amount:99, currency:EUR}
(:prices \((:) (:values 99)) EUR) ⇒ {amount:99, currency:EUR}
----

Note that among the delimited expressions, empty results are fine, as long as their concatenation
produces one or more values.

> === Optional Arguments

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
==== zero-or-one
```
1. Heading depth is increased in my suggested change—I think this is supposed to be a subsection of the "Cardinalities" section.
2. I've seen "Optional" arguments, "voidable" arguments/parameters", and "zero-or-one" used this this document. If this is a subsection of "Cardinalities", then we should use `zero-or-one` to be consistent with the other headings.

Author: This is different from cardinality.  This is talking about how _parameter cardinality_ -- the previous section -- allows certain _arguments_ to be omitted, ie they are optional.  This is a syntactic sugar based on cardinality.

> When a trailing parameter is voidable, an invocation can omit its corresponding argument, as long

Reviewer 3: Can you use an empty delimiting container to indicate no argument for an optional parameter? Or around a single argument for that parameter?

Author: Yes and yes.

Reviewer: Does this mean that optional arguments _must_ have a delimiting container?

Reviewer 5: My understanding was that optional parameters wouldn't have a delimiting container, and would simply use `(:)`/`(:void)` to indicate no value(s). I'm open to using a delimiting container for better symmetry with zero-or-more/one-or-more syntax, though.

My only reservation is what we do with trailing optional arguments that are _present_. Consider:
```js
(public foo
  [a, (any b?), c, (any d?)]
  (make_list a b c d))
```

Non-trailing optional arguments would always require a delimiting container:
```js
(:foo 1 (2) 3 (4)) // `b` is <2>
(:foo 1 ()  3 (4)) // `b` is <>
```
Should trailing optional arguments require one?
```js
(:foo 1 (2) 3 (4)) // `d` is <4>
(:foo 1 (2) 3  4)  // `d` is <4>
```
If `d` is not specified, the meaning is unambiguous. It's also unambiguous if we find any argument at all.

FWIW, I think always requiring a delimiting container is simplest / least surprising due to the consistency. However, I also think that trailing optionals are more common than non-trailing ones so there may be some appetite for streamlining that case.

That said, I also think _not_ using a delimiting container at all (and using `(:)` for the `none` case) is pretty good too.

Author: What makes these arguments "optional" is the ability to omit their corresponding expressions entirely, including delimiters.   I'm careful to say it's the _arguments_ that are optional.

In Zack's example `foo`, arguments for `b` are not optional, the delimiters (at least) are required because `c` is required.

[update] Zack's E-expressions are malformed, since `?` parameters don't use delimiters.  The correct invocations are:
```
(:foo 1  2  3  4 ) // `b` is <2>
(:foo 1 (:) 3  4 ) // `b` is <>
(:foo 1 (:) 3 (:)) // `d` is <>
(:foo 1 (:) 3    ) // `d` is <>
```

Author: Don't conflate "voidable"  (no argument expressions are required) with "optional" (expressions and delimiters can be omitted entirely).   I minted the word "voidable" specifically to distinguish the two cases.

as no following parameter is being given a value.  We’ve seen this as applied to rest-parameters,
but it also applies to `*?*` and `***` cardinality:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* optionals

>   [(**any* **a), (*any?* b), (*any!* c), (*any** d), (*any?* e), (*any\...* f)]

Reviewer 3: I think there's a typo here. The `*` should be postfixed on `any`, right?
```suggestion
  [(*any** **a), (*any?* b), (*any!* c), (*any** d), (*any?* e), (*any\...* f)]
```

Author: As written this boldfaces "any* " using double-star markup.  AsciiDoc is funky and/or buggy when trying to bold-face asterisks, and forms using single-star markup didn't seem to work and didnt' terminate properly.

That said I think that the `d` parameter is wrong.

  (make_list a b c d e f))
----

Since `d`, `e`, and `f` are all voidable, they can be omitted by invokers.  But `c` is required so
`a` and `b` must always be present, at least as an empty delimiter:

----
(:optionals [] (:) for_c) ⇒ [for_c]
----

Now `c` receives the symbol `for_c` while the other parameters are all void.  If we want to provide
just `e`, then we must also provide a delimiter for `d`:

----
(:optionals [] (:) for_c () for_e) ⇒ [for_c, for_e]
----

=== Tagless and Fixed-Width Types

It’s time to shift gears to discuss a feature that primarily benefits binary-encoded data:
tagless types.

> Those familiar with binary Ion will understand that the encoding of every value starts off with a

Reviewer 3: _Minor_—Editorial suggestion:
```suggestion
In Ion 1.0, the binary encoding of every value starts off with a
```

“type tag”, an opcode that indicates the data-type of the next value and thus the interpretation
of the following octets of data.  In general, these tags also indicate whether the value has
annotations, and whether it’s null.

These tags are necessary because the Ion data model allows values of any type to be used
anywhere. Ion documents are not schema-constrained: nothing forces any part of the data to have a
specific type or shape.  We call Ion “self-describing” precisely because each value
self-describes its type via a type tag.

> This adds considerable overhead throughout the document, which is frustrating when schema
> constraints are enforced through some mechanism outside the serializer/deserializer.  It’s worse

Reviewer 3: Editorial suggestion—we should focus on technical reasons rather than feeling (unless we're specifically talking about developer experience/ease-of-use).
```suggestion
If schema constraints are enforced through some mechanism outside the serializer/deserializer, the type tags are unnecessary and may add up to a non-trivial amount of wasted space.
```

when you observe that the overhead for each value also includes length information: encoding an
octet of data takes two octets on the stream.

Ion 1.1 confesses to the impact of this overhead, and the macro system aims to address it by

> allowing parameters to have tagless types.  These are semantic subtypes of the concrete types,

Reviewer 3: _Minor_—Editorial suggestion:
```suggestion
Ion 1.1 tries to mitigate this overhead in the binary format by allowing macro parameters to have tagless types.  These are semantic subtypes of the concrete types,
```

constrained such that type tags are not necessary in the binary form.  In general this can shave
4-6 bits off each value, which can add up in aggregate.  In the extreme, that octet of data can
be encoded with no overhead at all.

To define a tagless parameter, add the `*tagless*` modifier to any of the concrete types:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* point
  [(*tagless int* x), (*tagless int* y)]
  {x: x, y: y})
----
----

> (:point 3 17) => {x:3, y:17}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(:point 3 17) ⇒ {x:3, y:17}
```
Check for consistency using `⇒` vs `=>` throughout this document.

Author: I will, but note that AsciiDoc replaces the latter with the former so they render the same.

----

The type constraint has no real benefit here in text, as tagless types aim to improve the binary
encoding. TODO talk about binary length improvement.

This density comes at the cost of flexibility.  Tagless types cannot be annotated or null, and
argument values cannot be expressed using macros, like we’ve done before:

[{mrk}]
----
(:point null.int 17)   => _**error**: tagless int does not accept nulls_
(:point a::3 17)       => _**error**: tagless int does not accept annotations_
(:point (:values 1) 2) => _**error**: cannot use macro for a tagless argument_
----

While Ion text syntax doesn’t use tags—the types are built into the syntax—these errors ensure

> that a text E-expression can’t express things that can’t be done in the corresponding binary

Reviewer 3: Remove the double negative ("can't ... can't"):
```suggestion
that a text E-expression may only expresses things that can also be expressed using an equivalent binary
```

E-expression.

For more impact, use `*tagless*` with one of a set of additional “binary-only” types: `*uint*`,
`*uint8*`, `*uint16*`, `*uint32*`, `*uint64*`, `*int8*`, `*int16*`, `*int32*`, `*int64*`,

> `*float16*`, `*float32*`, and `*float64*`.  This set is called “binary only” because their values

Reviewer 3: Currently, some (or even most) Ion implementations don't actually write 16 bit floats. Does this mean that all Ion 1.1 implementations MUST be able to write 16 bit floats?

Author: Yes, at least inside binary E-expressions that declare them.

Reviewer: This surprises me as a requirement, shouldn't we then have a 16-bit float in the binary encoding?  Also what is motivating this requirement?

Reviewer 5: 16-bit floats are widely used in ML model weights; Ion users seeking to serialize their models have expressed a need for this.

Reviewer: Then we should have that type opcode allocated in the binary format.  It would be odd to require that only for macros.

have no unique representation in Ion text: they appear there as normal ints and floats.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* byte_array
  [(*tagless uint8\...* bytes)]
  [bytes])
----

> Invocations of this macro are encoded (more or less) as a plain sequence of octets, because the

Reviewer 3: Editorial suggestion—but also, am I understanding this correctly?
```suggestion
Invocations of this macro are encoded as a sequence of untagged octets, because the
```

=== Macro Shapes

We can now introduce the final kind of input constraint, macro-shaped parameters.  To understand
the motivation, consider modeling a scatter-plot as a list of points:

----
[{x:3, y:17}, {x:395, y:23}, {x:15, y:48}, {x:2023, y:5}, …]
----

Lists like these exhibit a lot of repetition. Since we already have a `point` macro, we can
eliminate a fair amount:

----
[(:point 3 17), (:point 395 23), (:point 15 48), (:point 2023 5), …]
----

This eliminates all the ``x``s and ``y``s, but leaves repeated macro invocations.  We can try to
wrap this in another macro, but we find the type constraints insufficient, since the tightest we
can go is `*struct*`, and things aren’t really any better:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* scatterplot [(*struct\...* points)]
  [points])
----
----
(:scatterplot (:point 3 17) (:point 395 23) (:point 15 48) (:point 2023 5) …)
----

What we’d like is to build eliminate the `point` calls and just write a stream of pairs, something
like:

----
(:scatterplot (3 17) (395 23) (15 48) (2023 5) …)
----

We can achieve exactly that with a macro-shaped parameter, in which we use the `point` macro as a

> pseudo-type:

Reviewer 3: Does this also imply that there are certain keywords (E.g. `any`, `uint8`)  that cannot be used as a macro name? (Is there a full list of keywords somewhere?)

Author: If any of those identifiers are used for macro names, they can still be referenced via the colon form like `':any'`.

I'll send you a link to the draft docs with more details.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* scatterplot [(*point\...* points)]
  [points])
----
----
(:scatterplot (3 17) (395 23) (15 48) (2023 5) …)
=>
[{x:3, y:17}, {x:395, y:23}, {x:15, y:48}, {x:2023, y:5}, …]
----

What’s happening here is that each argument S-expression like `(3 17)` is _implicitly an
E-expression_ invoking the `point` macro.  The argument mirrors the shape of the inner macro,
without repeating its name.  Further, expansion of the implied ``point``s happens automatically,
so the overall behavior is just like the preceding struct-based variant and the `points`
parameter produces a stream of structs.

As the text notation here suggests, macro-shaped parameters are tagless, and the binary form also

> elides any opcodes mentioning `point` and just encodes its arguments with minimal delimiting.

Reviewer 3: Can you use a macro with tag-ful (?) parameters as the macro-shape for a tag-less parameter?

Author: I don't think I understand that.  

Maybe this is an answer: You can't use an E-expression in an argument slot expecting a tagless type.  (The binary has no way to say that a macro is being invoked, since there's no tag.)

Reviewer 3: Suppose we get rid of the `tagless` from in the `point` definition. Scatterplot still has a tagless macro-shaped parameter, but the `point` macro-shape it uses no longer has tagless parameters.
```
(public point
  [(int x), (int y)]
  {x: x, y: y})
(public scatterplot [(point\... points)]
  [points])
```
Is this allowed?

Author: Yes, that's allowed.  Each invocation of `point` will have a tagged, potentially annotated and/or null, integer.
```
(:scatterplot (1 null) (a::1 null.int) ((:macro_producing_one_int) 9))
```
... is valid

Macro types can be combined with any cardinality, following the same rules as before.  Note that
when combined with `***` or `*+*` this requires callers to use two layers of delimiting
containers, and outer delimiter for the parameter-stream as a whole, and an inner delimiter for

> each macro instance:

Reviewer 3: What happens if the inner macro has voidable arguments, such as this?
```
(public foo_bar 
    [(any? f), (any? b)] 
    { foo: f, bar: b })

(public ambiguous_macro 
    [(foo_bar+ foo_bars)]
    [foo_bars])
```
Simple case:
```
(:ambiguous_macro ((1 2) (3 4)))  ⇒ { foo: 1, bar: 2 } {foo: 3, bar: 4}
```
Ambiguous case?
```
(:ambiguous_macro ((:) (3 4))) ⇒ [{}, {foo: 3, bar: 4}]
// or
(:ambiguous_macro ((:) (3 4))) ⇒ [{foo: 3, bar: 4}]
```

Author: (nitpick: The "simple case" is missing `[]` surrounding the result)

Your latter two cases are malformed. Where they have `(:)` they require an S-expression delimiting the implied invocation of `foo_bar`.   Remember that `(:)` is not an S-expression.

Reviewer 3: > Where they have (:) they require an S-expression delimiting the implied invocation of foo_bar.

Okay, so these are equivalent, right?
```
(:ambiguous_macro (((:)) (3 4))) ⇒ [{}, {foo: 3, bar: 4}]
(:ambiguous_macro (() (3 4))) ⇒ [{}, {foo: 3, bar: 4}]
```

From earlier:
> Within the delimiting container, the invocation can have any number of values and/or macro
invocations.  The macro parameter produces the results of those expressions, concatenated into a
single stream, and the expander verifies that each value on that stream is acceptable by the
parameter’s declared type.

But when we are using macro-shape parameters, that goes out the window because the `()` of the implied macro invocation takes precedence, is that right?

Reviewer 3: I don't think I'm going to be the only person who is confused by the way that delimiting containers and macro-shapes interact.

Would it be worth changing the syntax so that delimiting containers are `[]` and macro-shape delimiters are `()` so that you can tell at a glance which is which?

Author: Yeah, I think those are both correct.  In the former, the `(:)` is providing void to `f`, and optional `b` is implicitly void as well.

Author: > Would it be worth changing the syntax so that delimiting containers are `[]` and macro-shape delimiters are `()` so that you can tell at a glance which is which?

This is a *very* interesting suggestion to consider.  Allowing `()` for delimiters can avoid a bunch of commas, but as used in my own examples using `[]` makes for easier reading in many (if not most) cases.  I hadn't considered making the two concepts and notations one-to-one as you suggest, but I'll definitely look into it.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* scatterplot
  [(*point** points), (*string* x_label), (*string* y_label)]
  { points: [points], x_label: x_label, y_label: y_label })
----
----
(:scatterplot ((3 17) (395 23) (15 48) (2023 5)) "hour" "widgets")
=>
{
  points: [{x:3, y:17}, {x:395, y:23}, {x:15, y:48}, {x:2023, y:5}],
  x_label: "hour",
  y_label: "widgets"
}
----

TODO Describe binary representation

CAUTION: Because these are tagless encodings, we cannot use macros in place of the delimiting

> containers, so unfortunately we cannot generate a point or series of points through a macro.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand the problematic use case here. Can you provide an example of when _not_ to use macro shapes?

Author: Don't use a macro shape if you want the caller to be able to use some other form than "sexp holding the macro arguments".

Reviewer: Actually, I don't think I understand this advisory as well--I think what you're saying is that the only thing allowed are arguments that denote the macro invocation (specifically the s-expression containing the arguments.  One could not use anything else in its stead.  Is that right?

Author: OK I see the problem, my CAUTION confuses two things.   It's repeating something already covered, that you can't replace a delimiting-list with a macro invocation.  I'll make that more clear, but what it _should_ be saying is that you can't use a macro as an element of the delimiting-list, either (because the point of the macro-shape is to avoid the tags).

Let me add an examples here, hopefully it'll clarify.

Reviewer 3: > It's repeating something already covered, that you can't replace a delimiting-list with a macro invocation

I might have already said it, but this seems like a good reason for delimiting containers and macros/macro-shapes to have different syntax.

> you can't use a macro as an element of the delimiting-list

Just curious—is this because we think it's a bad idea or because there's a technical limitation that prevents us from figuring out how a macro output should be converted to macro-shape arguments?

It seems like it would be convenient to be able to do something like this:
```
(*public* point
  [(*tagless int* x), (*tagless int* y)]
  {x: x, y: y})

(public scatterplot
  [(point* points), (string x_label), (string y_label)]
  { points: [points], x_label: x_label, y_label: y_label })

(public cartesian_product
  [(any+ a), (any+ b)]
  (for_each a (for_each b (a b)))
```
```
(:scatterplot [(1 1), (:cartesian_product [1, 2], [3, 4])] "hour" "widgets")
  ⇒ (:scatterplot [(1 1), [(1 3), (1 4), (2 3), (2 4)]] "hour" "widgets")
  ⇒ (:scatterplot [(1 1), (1 3), (1 4), (2 3), (2 4)] "hour" "widgets")
  ⇒ {
      points: [{x:1, y:1}, {x:1, y:3}, {x:1, y:4}, {x:2, y:3}, {x:2, y:4}],
      x_label: "hour",
      y_label: "widgets"
    }
```
I know that cartesian product is unlikely to be used in the real world, but the point is that being able to use the outputs of one macro as the inputs for a macro-shape parameter seems like it would make it a lot easier to compose macros.

Without this ability, you'd need to write a separate logic and add separate parameters in the `scatterplot` function to handle to the cartesian product logic. It's _kind of_ like the difference between these Rust functions: 
```rust
fn generateSpeech(str_utterances: Vec<&str>, string_utterances: Vec<String>, utf8bytes_utterances: Vec<&[u8]>) -> Mp3Bytes;
fn generateSpeech(utterances: Vec<impl Into<String>>) -> Mp3Bytes;
```

Author: The technical limitation is that the binary format has--by design intent--no bits that can be used to say that some other macro is to be used other than `point` in that position.  It's tagless!

If we ignore that to consider your proposal, the first thing that strikes me is that you presume that a macro in that position should be producing the _arguments_ to `point`, and not alternative _results_.  That's debatable!

IMO the most obvious thing one might want to do there is _explicitly_ invoke `point`, eg 
```
(:scatterplot [(:point 1 1), (:point 1 3)] ...)
```
That's the mental model one should have: these sexps are just syntax sugar for the declared macro.  The signature is _forcing_ you to use that macro.

It also makes my spidey-sense absolutely _scream_ to consider having a macro generate syntactic forms that then need to be parsed again by another macro, dynamically.  I think that really muddies the syntactic and computational layers going on here.

Understand that the `[]` and `()` in the `scatterplot` invocation _are not data_, they are part of the _syntax_ of scatterplot.  The only expression positions are where there's currently integers.   In the binary encoding, there's nothing correspoding to the `()` in that example: since `point` is fixed arity, each instance is encoded purely as two integers, and that whole parameter is just a sequence of integers (with some bits somewhere to indicate thge end of the sequence. 

But really it's all moot, because macro-shapes are tagless by intent.  (and I think we omitted tagged macros-shapes for particular reasons I can't recall ATM).

=== Macro Shapes

We can now introduce the final kind of input constraint, macro-shaped parameters.  To understand
the motivation, consider modeling a scatter-plot as a list of points:

----
[{x:3, y:17}, {x:395, y:23}, {x:15, y:48}, {x:2023, y:5}, …]
----

Lists like these exhibit a lot of repetition. Since we already have a `point` macro, we can
eliminate a fair amount:

----
[(:point 3 17), (:point 395 23), (:point 15 48), (:point 2023 5), …]
----

This eliminates all the ``x``s and ``y``s, but leaves repeated macro invocations.  We can try to
wrap this in another macro, but we find the type constraints insufficient, since the tightest we
can go is `*struct*`, and things aren’t really any better:

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* scatterplot [(*struct\...* points)]
  [points])
----
----
(:scatterplot (:point 3 17) (:point 395 23) (:point 15 48) (:point 2023 5) …)
----

What we’d like is to build eliminate the `point` calls and just write a stream of pairs, something
like:

----
(:scatterplot (3 17) (395 23) (15 48) (2023 5) …)
----

We can achieve exactly that with a macro-shaped parameter, in which we use the `point` macro as a

> pseudo-type:

Reviewer: Why not just call this "type" instead of "pseudo-type?"  There is nothing pseudo about it.

Author: I'm trying to make a distinction throughout between "type" and "shape".  Macro's aren't types from the perspective of the Ion data types, which is what we validate for the other shapes.   This defines the shape of the argument, but does not constrain the type of data those arguments produce.

[{mrk}]
----
(*public* scatterplot [(*point\...* points)]
  [points])
----
----
(:scatterplot (3 17) (395 23) (15 48) (2023 5) …)
=>
[{x:3, y:17}, {x:395, y:23}, {x:15, y:48}, {x:2023, y:5}, …]
----

> What’s happening here is that each argument S-expression like `(3 17)` is _implicitly an
> E-expression_ invoking the `point` macro.  The argument mirrors the shape of the inner macro,

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
Each argument S-expression like `(3 17)` is _implicitly an
E-expression_ invoking the `point` macro.  The argument mirrors the shape of the inner macro,
```

without repeating its name.  Further, expansion of the implied ``point``s happens automatically,
so the overall behavior is just like the preceding struct-based variant and the `points`
parameter produces a stream of structs.

> As the text notation here suggests, macro-shaped parameters are tagless, and the binary form also
> elides any opcodes mentioning `point` and just encodes its arguments with minimal delimiting.

Reviewer: *Minor*: Editorial suggestion.

```suggestion
Macro-shaped parameters are tagless, and the binary form also
elides any opcodes mentioning `point` and just encodes its arguments with minimal delimiting.
```
